---
layout: post
title: DIY VR Part 1 | Planning the Headset
---

Two years ago, I made my first VR headset using cardboard, some magnifying glass lenses, and my phone, with some help from online guides. I later added a diving mask to better hold the lenses and a hat to hold it to my head. While it worked quite well, it had some definite issues and has started to fall apart recently, alongside the fact that I've since gotten a new phone that no longer fits it. My goal now is to take what I learned from the first and new techniques I've learned to make a new and improved version.

The first thing to consider is the materials. As stated, my first headset was made from cardboard, tape, and magnifying glass lenses. The lenses were quite good and low cost, so I'll use them again, but the cardboard and tape make it look bad, and dig into my skin. That needs to change, so lets see what the options are.
*wood  *foam  *metal  *plastic
Now lets look at the pros and cons of each. Wood is very much an easy to work material, and is also quite strong for something that would be on my face, however, in order to make the wood hold together solidly, it would take either complex cuts, or to be very bulky and heavy. If I had a laser cutter, then this would be a very viable solution, but with online hand tools and a few small power tools, this won't cut it for me. Foam is actually a very good solution here. It's lightweight, resistant to twisting and bending, relatively unaffected by temperature and humidity, it's easy to work, glue works well on it, and is comfortable on the face. The issues arise in that it can break easily, and I've had issues finding stock that's large enough, thin or thick enough, and cheap enough for me. Metal is probably the most problematic. While it would be light depending on the metal and size of course, in order for that to be the case, it would be very thin and therefore easier to damage. It would also be harder to work, especially without a welder, and painful on the face. The final material I considered was plastic. Plastic in general is light, strong and easy to work, but usually more expensive, however, When you look at specific plastics that can change a bit. Enter HDPE. This is what milk jugs, prescription bottles, and soda bottle caps are made of. It's a thermoplastic, which means that it can be remelted and hardened as much as you would like, and specifically melts at about 350 degrees Fahrenheit. Another place it can be found is in plastic wood, which is because you can work it with woodworking tools easily. It also dissolves in acetone, more commonly known as nail polish remover, which allows you to make weldon for it by mixing some small scraps with acetone, which you then spread the resulting solution on the areas you want to join, and then clamp them. You can also use a heat gun to melt the points and bond pieces that way, meaning no screws required if you don't want to use them, thereby allowing thinner pieces It still isn't perfect though. Melting it down and getting the shape you want can be difficult, and it creates very fine dust when cut that is very bad for your lungs, so make sure that you are running some dust removal system, such as a shop vac next to your work at all imets, even when using hand tools.

In my case, I will be using HDPE, and so in future posts I'll have instructions for actually making HDPE stock, and will then use it in the final construction of the headset. I hope you all enjoyed and decide to check later posts in this series, as there's much more than the headset to plan and design.
