---
layout: post
title: DIY Steam Link Switch | Planning the Console
---

The Nintendo Switch is one of the best selling and most popular video game consoles the modern world has seen. One the great appeals of this console is its ability to switch between being a portable console in your backpack, and a home console on the bigscreen. However, the Switch still has some untapped potential, at least before you include the hacking and homebrew scenes, however not all wish to risk their Switch, and yet others are wary of the price of a Switch. One such piece of untapped potential is Steam Link, which allows you to use a more powerful gaming PC to run the game you are playing, but send it to more places than your gaming pc might normally reach. The Switch is a particularly interesting case for this, as it would allow  one to not only hook up to any TVs with a dock, but also play in any other random area of the house, all with one device.

It's with this thought in mind that I came up with an idea to leverage the extensibility of the Raspberry Pi series of singleboard computers with the design philosophy of a Nintendo Switch. Raspberry Pi's are already popular in the retro gaming scene for the software RetroPi, which allows it to emulate many retro consoles, sometimes even up to the Dreamcast, GameCube and Wii. Steam has also given it some attention by making official Steam Link software to run on the Pi. As such, my concept for this console is a Switch like device that can be connected to a TV and played, or carried around the house and beyond.

Of course, some features just aren't necessarily viable. Specifically, the feature of the joycons being able to detach from the console as stand-alone controllers. Steam Link only supports XBox 360, Xbox One, And Playstation 4 DualShock 4 controllers. In order to implement controls on either side of the portable display, I've decided to choose between heavily modifying a wired XBox 360 controller to stretch around the screen, or to take advantage of the Arduino Xinput library, which would make the Arduino appear as an XBox 360 controller. Either way, due to the complexity of either solution, and the added complexity of making the controller able to split from the console, The controller will instead be a permanent fixture on the console, and other controllers will be used when it is docked.

Another compromise to reduce complexity is that the docks will have multiple connectors compared to the Switch's one USB-C port. These ports will connect to HDMI for audio and video, a power plug to power and charge the device while docked, and an optional USB expansion bus to connect more devices, such as flash drives with games or wired controllers. The outer shell of the console will be 3D printed, as well as the docks for it to slide into at any given TV. The ports on the dock will likely be custom designed for each dock so as to fit any given cables used.
