---
layout: post
title: E-Paper Recipe Book Part 1 | Overview
---

Ever since the pandemic began, I've been getting more and more into cooking at home. As a result, I've been looking up, reading, and using recipes more than I had in the past. Because of this, I came to realize, recipes are a pain to keep track of. At the forefront of the problem has been recipe blogs, where I have to scroll past paragraphs of stories before I can reach what I'm looking for. Once there, how do I make it easy to read? I have very little counter space, so it's hard to get my laptop up there, and my phone can be hard to see, as the afternoon sun shines in right on to it. And then, after I'm done, how do I save the recipe for later? Usually I bookmark the page, but then I have to scroll all the way through again. And while I could use notecards, I don't want to dirty them while I'm cooking, and not all recipes would really fit on just one anyway, and just make more clutter.

So, I decided to sit down, and figure out a plan, and that's what brings us to now. My current plan for the final iteration of this project is a Raspberry Pi with an E-paper screen, reading recipes stored as XML files. The XML files give me an easy way to store all of the data from the recipes, and then parse them out for when I plan to cook them, and the E-paper screen makes the device relatively efficient, and means that the afternoon glare won't be an issue.

The device will work as such: You can scroll through a list of recipes, likely using some buttons on the device, or potentially a touch screen, until you reach the file you'd like. once selected, it will show a list of ingredients and utensils needed. Then, as you click through, each step in the recipe gets a whole "slide" like a PowerPoint dedicated to itself. Also, one of the buttons will access a timer page where a user can set the time, and then it will run in the background before making an auditory signal that the time is complete. Furthermore, if the timer page is accessed on a step of a recipe, then the timer will automatically be set to the time given in that step, and then can be edited before being started.

This set up was designed so that I could have one central store of my recipes to access. I do also have some optional features planned, such as linking to a mobile grocery app so that you can pick recipes and it will auto-populate the grocery list with what the recipes need, and allowing multiple timers. I would also like to implement the ability to search recipes by ingredient list, so that users can see what they can make with what they have. These features would likely be difficult on the E-paper screen due to slow response times making typing difficult. A possible solution there might be to have that same app connect to allow those features by accessing what files are on the device on your phone as well.

So what's the next step? Well, first, I plan to do some research on how people commonly display programs on E-paper. Once I have that knowledge, it can help to guide my choice of programming language, and therefore XML library. Finally, until the parts for the device come in, I will first implement the program as either a program on my laptop or an app on my phone to at least test the functionality. So stay tuned for that. I want to do a better job of actually using this website and posting more regularly, so here's hoping I achieve that.
